# Introduction

This folder includes the models used to generate lake chemistry and ecology forecasts for the western basin of Lake Vansjø (Vanemfjorden), predictions generated by the models for a historic hindcast period, model performance statistics from hindcast model runs, as well as a number of other exploratory statistical analyses used as the basis for deciding on operational models used in forecasting. A brief guide to the variables which forecasts are produced for and the models used in forecasting is given [here](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Guidance_documents/GuidanceDoc_InterpretingLakeForecast.pdf).

# Quick guide to the locations of things that might be of particular interest:

- Model predictions for the period 1981 - 2019 are [here](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Data/Predictions/Historic/Prediction_operational_1981-2019.csv). See the [guidance document](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Guidance_documents/GuidanceDoc_InterpretingLakeForecast.pdf) for a brief description of the models used to generate these predictions.
- Seasonally-aggregated lake chemistry and ecology observations, used for example when calculating goodness-of-fit statistics comparing forecasts with observations, are [here](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Data/DataMatrices/Seasonal_BN_obs/seasonal_obs_GBN_1980-2019.csv). These are available for the period 1980-2019 for TP, chl-a and lake colour, and for the period 1996-2019 for cyanobacteria.
- Forecasted values for the hindcast period (1981-2019) produced by the Bayesian Network driven by ERA5 data are [here](C:\Data\GitHub\WATExR\Norway_Morsa\BayesianNetwork\Data\Predictions\Historic\GBN_prediction_era5_1981-2019.csv). If we assume a perfect BN model, these are 'pseudo-observations'. **Note: this model was not used in the operational forecasting tool**.
- Goodness-of-fit statistics and plots for the historic period are in [this folder](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/tree/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Hindcast_stats_plots). Goodness-of-fit statistics for the models selected for producing operational forecasts for the historic period are [here](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Hindcast_stats_plots/GoF_sim_vs_obs_operational.csv). These compare forecasts to real lake observations. A comparison of forecasts driven by System5 data to forecasts driven by ERA5 data (so-called 'pseudo-observations') is [here](https://github.com/icra/WATExR/blob/master/Norway_Morsa/BayesianNetwork/Hindcast_stats_plots/GoF_sim_vs_pseudoobs_1993-2019.xlsx). Accompanying tercile plots (also comparing forecasts driven by System5 data to forecasts driven by ERA5 data) are in the Tercile_Plots folder. **Note: no stats or tercile plots are available for TP, as TP is not affected by meteorological variables in the model, and so the comparison of S5-driven predictions and ERA5-driven predictions produces the same output.** Time series plots comparing model predictions to lake observations are in the Timeseries_gof folder.
- All the code to define models and produce predictions is in the 'Notebooks' folder. More info on the contents and purpose of each notebook is given in the readme in the Notebooks folder, as well as within each notebook in its introductory markdown cell.
